
=== PAGE 1 ===
  
 NOUN 
 A noun is a part of speech that represents a person, place, thing, idea, or concept. 
 Kinds of Nouns  :- 
 1.  Proper Noun 
 2.  Common Noun 
 3.  Collective Noun 
 4.  Material Noun 
 5.  Abstract Noun 
 (1) Proper Noun :- 
 A  proper  noun  is  a  name  which  refers  only  to  a  single  person,  place,  or  thing  and  there  is  no  common  name  for  it.  In  written  English,  a 
 proper noun always begins with capital letters. 
 Examples :-  Delhi, Yamuna, Rohit, The Taj Mahal 
 (2) Common Noun :-  A  common noun  is a name for something  which gives common or general identity to a thing, person, or place. 
 Examples :-  boy, girl, town, river, country etc. 
 (3)  Collective Noun :-  It is a group denoting word.  It can be  used to denote ‘undivided whole/unit’ or members of the group. 
 Examples :-  Committee, clergy,  group, family, ﬂock,  public, team, army, battalion, audience, shoal, crowd, galaxy, series, gang, crew etc. 
 Note  :-  A collective noun can be  Singular or Plural  ,  depending on how you see the individuals in the group. 
 If  you  see  the  individuals  acting  together  ,  as  a  whole,  then  you  treat  the  collective  noun  as  singular  (with  singular  verbs  and  singular 
 pronouns). 
 Examples  :-  The  team  was  given  a  standing  ovation  for  winning  the  cricket  match.  (The  team  is  seen  as  singular,  so  the  singular  verb 
 ‘was’ has been used.) 
 If  you  see  the  members  of  a  group  acting  individually  ,  then  you  treat  the  collective  noun  as  plural  (with  plural  verbs  and  plural 
 pronouns). 
 Examples :- 
 ●  The  jury  have  not  reached  a  conclusion  because  they  are  still  arguing  among  themselves  .  (The  jury  is  seen  as  plural,  so  plural 
 verb ‘have’ has been used.) 
 (4) Material Noun :-  A material noun is a word for  a material, a substance, or an ingredient that other things are made from. 
 Examples :-  concrete, cotton, gold, iron, meat, milk,  rice, coffee etc. 
 ●  The bag is made of  cloth. 
 ●  Gold  jewellery is very popular in India. 
 Material Noun is considered uncountable  and we use  a singular verb with them. We do not use any article before them. 
 (5) Abstract Noun :- 
 An  abstract  noun  is  a  word  which  names  something  that  you  cannot  see,  hear,  touch,  smell,  or  taste.  It  talks  about  quality,  concept, 
 state, feeling, emotion etc.  It has no physical existence. It can only be experienced. 
 Examples :-  Consideration, parenthood, belief, joy,  love,  honesty, hatred etc. 
 Most words ending in  ness/hood/ship/ty/th  are abstract  nouns. 
 Examples :-  childhood, freshness, integrity, duty,  friendship, courtship, membership etc. 
 Nouns can further be divided into  :- 
 (A)  Countable :- 
 The nouns that can be counted and made plural are called countable nouns. Countable nouns can take any article:  a, an, the  . 
 


=== PAGE 2 ===
  
 Examples :-  Boy, Girl, chair, table etc. 
 (B)  Uncountable :- 
 The  nouns  that  cannot  be  counted  and  cannot  be  made  plural  are  called  uncountable  nouns.  Uncountable  nouns  can  take  only  article 
 ‘  the’ and not a/an. 
 Examples :-  information, bread, news, advice, luggage,  furniture etc. 
 IMPORTANT RULES REGARDING USAGE OF NOUNS  :- 
 RULE 1  :-  These nouns are always plural and a plural  verb is used with them. 
 Headphones,  knickers,  premises  (buildings),  alms,  ruins,  amends,  archives,  arrears,  auspices,  congratulations,  embers,  ﬁreworks, 
 lodgings,  outskirts,  particulars,  proceeds,  regards,  riches,  remains,  savings,  shambles,  surroundings,  tidings,  furnishings,  earnings, 
 leftovers,  troops,  tactics,  thanks,  valuables,  forceps,  wages,  belongings,  braces,  scissors,  tongs,  pliers,  pincers,  bellows,  trousers, 
 pants, tights, pyjamas, shorts, gallows, fangs, spectacles, goggles, binoculars, eyeglasses, whereabouts, obsequies. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  The  scissors  which are used by you are mine. 
 ●  Your  clothes  are dirty. 
 ●  Have you seen my  glasses  ? I want to read the newspaper. 
 ●  The table of  contents  should not contain any pictures. 
 ●  Firearms  were used to disperse the crowd. 
 ●  I live on the  outskirts  of the city. 
 ●  We should keep our  surroundings  neat and clean. 
 Note  :-  Some of these nouns are often used with the  expression “a pair of”, as they refer to things made up of two parts. 
 ●  a pair of trousers 
 ●  a pair of jeans 
 ●  a pair of shoes 
 ●  a pair of slippers 
 ●  a pair of glasses 
 ●  a pair of gloves 
 ●  a pair of earrings 
 ●  a pair of socks 
 Note  :-  With  “a pair of”  , a singular verb will be  used. 
 Example :-  He has bought  a  wonderful  pair of  shoes. 
 RULE  2 :-  These nouns appear to be plural but are  actually singular and we use a singular verb with them. 
 Examples :-  news, innings, politics, summons, linguistics  etc  . 
 Names of subjects ending with “s”. 
 Examples :-  Physics, Economics, Civics, Mathematics  etc. 
 Names of diseases ending with “s”. 
 Examples :-  Diabetes, Rabies, Mumps, Measles, Shingles,  etc. 
 Names of games ending with “s”. 
 Examples :-  Billiards, Athletics, Dominoes, Draughts,  etc. 
 Note  :-  Articles are not used with these nouns and  s/es can not be removed from these nouns. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  Athletics is  good for young people. 
 ●  Sapna has been suffering from  Diabetes  . 
 ●  Linguistics is  the study of language. 
 ●  Darts is  a popular game in England. 
 ●  Billiards is  played all over the world. 
 


=== PAGE 3 ===
  
 RULE  3  :-  These  nouns  appear  to  be  singular  but  are  plural  and  a  plural  verb  is  used  with  them  -  cattle,  cavalry,  infantry,  poultry, 
 peasantry, children, gentry, police, people, clergy, folk, vermin, etc. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  The gentry of our colony  are  sagacious. 
 ●  The police  are  saluting the minister. 
 RULE 4  :-  These nouns are used in singular form only  and they are uncountable nouns only. 
 Scenery,  Poetry,  Furniture,  Advice,  Information,  Hair,  Business,  Mischief,  Bread,  Stationery,  Crockery,  Luggage,  Baggage,  Postage, 
 Knowledge,  Wastage,  Money,  Jewellery,  Breakage,  Equipment,  Work,  Evidence,  Word,  Fuel,  Bedding,  soap,  butter,  Milk,  Rice,  Sugar, 
 Cash, ﬁlth, plastic, rubber etc. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  The scenery is very beautiful. 
 ●  I need some  equipment  to repair the damage. 
 Note  :-  [We  cannot  use  a/an  with  these  nouns  immediately  before  them.  To  express  a  quantity  of  an  uncountable  noun  ,i.e  to  make  the 
 singular or plural of the noun, we  use a word or expression like  some, a lot of, much, a bit of, a  great deal of, kind of.  ] 
 Examples :- 
 ●  He gave me  a great deal of  advice before my interview. 
 ●  Can you give me  some  information about uncountable  nouns? 
 ●  He did not have  much  sugar left. 
 ●  A lot of  wonderful jewellery was available in the  shop. 
 ●  A piece of  jewellery is here for you. 
 Note  :-  The verb used varies as per the usage of the  noun. 
 RULE 5  :- 
 Hair  :  Be  careful  with  the  noun  hair  which  is  normally  uncountable  in  English,  so  it  is  not  used  in  the  plural.  It  can  be  countable  only 
 when referring to individual hairs. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  Her hair is straight. 
 ●  Your three hairs are black. 
 ●  There is a hair in the rice. 
 Paper  :-  When  paper  refers to exams it is countable  otherwise it is singular. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  A lot of paper is used in the oﬃces. 
 ●  I have to answer two English papers in May. 
 RULE 6  :-  These nouns are in the  same form  in singular  and plural. 
 Means, Headquarters, Barracks, Offspring, innings, crossroads, Deer, sheep, series, species, ﬁsh, crew, jury, aircraft, counsel etc  . 
 Examples :- 
 ●  A deer  was seen in the park. 
 ●  Two deer  were seen in the park. 
 ●  Deer  are  grazing in the ﬁeld. 
 ●  The  headquarters  of IDBI bank  is  situated in Mumbai. 
 RULE 7  :-  [ The + common noun ] acts as an abstract  noun and denotes that quality or characteristic. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  It is  the  animal in Mr. Pardeep that makes him commit  such a heinous crime. 
 (‘The animal’ means qualities of an animal, not the actual animal.) 
 ●  A  mother in Shweta is still alive. (  Incorrect). 
 ●  The  mother in Shweta is still alive.  (Correct).  (‘The  mother’ means motherhood or the qualities of a mother) 
 RULE 8  :-  For nouns ending in  “ful”  , add  “s”  to  “ful”  to make it plural. 
 Examples :-  Cupful - Cupfuls (Correct), Cupsful  (Incorrect) 
 


=== PAGE 4 ===
  
 Teaspoonfuls, cupfuls, handfuls, glassfuls 
 RULE 9  :-  Half  : Be careful with the word  half  which  is always used in the following format: 
 ●  A + half + noun 
 ●  Half + a/an + noun 
 ●  Number + and a half + Plural noun 
 ●  Number (a/an/two…) + noun + and a half 
 Examples :- 
 ●  Rachna will have to cover one km and a half in thirty minutes. (  Incorrect  ). 
 ●  Rachna will have to cover a km and a half in thirty minutes. (  Correct  ). 
 ●  One and a half glass of milk will be suﬃcient for our baby. (  Incorrect  ) 
 ●  One and a half glasses of milk will be suﬃcient for our baby. (  Correct  ) 
 RULE 10  :-  Hyphenated noun: 
 Expressions such as  a ten-rupee note  ,  a two-mile walk,  a ﬁve-year-old child, a three-day workshop, a twenty-man committee  are 
 treated as singular. We don’t pluralize them. Hyphenated words are not pluralized. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  I attended  a three-days  workshop. (  Incorrect)  (use  three-day workshop) 
 ●  A  three-member  committee was formed to look into the  matter. (  Correct) 
 RULE 11  :-  When words like  dozen, hundred, million,  billion  are used with a number,  we use them in singular  form. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  There are four dozen bananas in this basket.(  Correct  ) 
 ●  There are four dozens bananas in this basket. (  Incorrect  ) 
 ●  There are four dozens of bananas in this basket. (  Incorrect  ) 
 ●  There are more than eight billion people in the world. (  Correct  ) 
 ●  There are more than eight billions people in the world. (  Incorrect  ) 
 Exception  :-  But  if  we  use  Indeﬁnite  countable  with  them  then  we  can  make  them  plural.  Like  dozens  of  men,  thousands  of  people, 
 millions of stars, etc. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  Elon musk spends  millions of  dollars on his ambitious  projects. 
 ●  Hundreds of  people gathered on the streets to protest  against the new bill. 
 Note :-  With  pair  and  score  , we use  ‘of’  and the  plural form is used when there is more than one pair or score. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  I bought  a pair of  shoes for the party. (  Correct  ) 
 ●  I bought  three pairs of  socks for my daughter. (  Correct  ) 
 ●  The shopkeeper gave me  three scores of  pencils for  two hundred rupees. (  Correct  ) 
 ●  The fruit vendor gave me  a score of  kiwis for one  thousand rupees. (  Correct  ) 
 RULE 12  :- 
 “The  +  adjective”  like  “  the  poor”,  “the  blind”,  “the  deaf”  etc.  ,  are  always  plural.  We  don’t  make  their  plural  forms  by  adding  “s”  to  them. 
 And also, in place of “the + adjective’s + noun” , “ the noun of the adjective” is used. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  The poor  need to work too hard to meet their basic  needs. (‘The poor’ is plural, so plural verb ‘need’ will be used) 
 ●  The poor’s plight  is very pathetic in the USA. (  Incorrect  ) 
 ●  The plight of the poor  is very pathetic in the USA.  (  Correct  ) 
 RULE 13  :-  The + plural surname denotes a whole family  and a plural verb is used with it. 
 Example :- 
 ●  The Sharmas  have  been living here for many years. 
 RULE 14  :-  There are certain nouns which are used  by Indians while speaking but they are incorrect. 
 


=== PAGE 5 ===
  
 Example :- 
 ●  What is your  good name? (Incorrect) 
 What is your  name? (Correct) 
    S.N.  Incorrect  Correct 
 1.  Cousin brother/sister  Cousin 
 2.  The teacher of English  English teacher 
 3.  Pickpocketer  Pickpocket 
 4.  Good name  Name 
 5.  Big blunder  Blunder 
 6.  Members of the family  Family members 
 7.  Years back  Years ago 
 8.  Out of station  Out of town 
 9.  Cinema (Building)  Movie 
 10.  Prepone  Reschedule 
 RULE 15  :- 
 If the same noun is used before and after a preposition , both the nouns should be in singular form, and a singular verb will be used. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  Day after day  .  (Correct) 
 ●  Days after days.  (Incorrect) 
 ●  City after city  was swept away by the ﬂood.  (Correct) 
 ●  Letter after letter  was sent by the department.  (Correct) 
 ●  He went  door to door  in search of water. (  Correct) 
 RULE  16  :-  There  are  some  nouns  that  are  common  for  both  the  genders  like  student,  teacher,  child,  advocate,  worker,  clerk,  leader, 
 musician,  cousin,  driver,  friend,  teenager  ,  etc.  They  are  used  for  both  Male  and  Female  Genders.  These  kinds  of  nouns  are  used  as 
 singular  and generally:  he/his/him  are used after  them. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  “My mom works at school. She is a teacher.”.( Here teacher refers to  mom and she  , therefore, refers  to a  feminine noun.) 
 ●  “My dad works at school. He is a teacher.” (Here teacher refers to  dad and he,  therefore, refers to a  masculine  noun  .) 
 RULE 17  :- 
 Types of Noun-Gender : 
 1  -  Masculine Gender :-  A noun that represents a male  is known as the masculine gender, like- Boy, man, lion, King, father, son etc. 
 2  -  Feminine Gender :-  A noun that represents a female  is known as the feminine gender, like-girl, woman, lioness, sister, mother, earth, 
 goddess etc. 
 3  -  Common  Gender  :-  A  noun  that  represents  both  males  and  females  is  known  as  the  common  gender,  like-  child,  baby,  teacher, 
 servant, guest, infant, owner, parent, etc. 
 4  -  Neuter  Gender  :-  A  noun  that  represents  a  thing  that  is  non-living  is  called  a  neuter  gender.  All  non-living  objects  fall  into  this 
 category, like-box, chair, chalk, butter, room ,book , copy, etc. 
 RULES FOR CHANGING MASCULINE NOUN TO FEMININE NOUN: 
 RULE  (i)  :-  Masculine can be changed into feminine  by adding ‘-ess’. 
 Examples :- 
 Prince        -        Princess  Lion        -        Lioness 
 Host           -        Hostess  Tailor      -       Tailoress 
 


=== PAGE 6 ===
  
 RULE  (ii)  :-  Some  masculine  nouns  end  in  a  vowel  +  r  .  They  can  be  changed  into  feminine  gender  by  adding  ‘-ess’  and  removing  the 
 ‘vowel before the last letter’. 
 Examples :- 
 Actor         -      Actress  Waiter       -      Waitress 
 Founder    -      Foundress  Hunter  -       Huntress 
 RULE (iii)  :-  Masculine can be changed into the feminine  by using a completely different word. 
 Examples  :- 
 King        -       Queen  Dog          -        Bitch 
 Son        -        Daughter  Boy          -         Girl 
 RULE (iv)  :- 
 Feminine of the compound noun is made by changing the masculine word for the compound noun that comes in the front. 
 Examples :- 
 He-bear          -     She-bear  Jack-ass       -       Jenny-ass 
 Peacock         -     Peahen  Grandson      -       Granddaughter 
 Gentleman     -     Gentlewoman  Landlord        -  Landlady 
 Headmaster  -     Headmistress  Manservant  -  Maidservant 
 RULE 18  :- 
 WORDS DENOTING GROUPS 
 1.  An  army/ colony  of ants 
 2.  An  armada/ﬂeet  of ships 
 3.  An  atlas  of maps 
 4.  A  band  of musicians 
 5.  A  batch  of letters 
 6.  A  bundle  of sticks/ newspapers/ old clothes 
 7.  A  board  of directors 
 8.  A  bevy  of girls, women, oﬃcers etc. 
 9.  A  brigade/troop  of soldiers 
 10.  A  bunch  of grapes, keys, bananas etc. 
 11.  A  caravan  of merchants, pilgrims, travellers 
 12.  A  cast  of actors 
 13.  A  coalition  of parties 
 14.  A  chain/ range  of mountains/ islands or hills 
 15.  A  choi  r of singers 
 16.  A  class/batch  of students 
 17.  A  collection  of stamps 
 18.  A  clump/ grove  of trees 
 19.  A  cloud  of grasshoppers 
 20.  A  code  of laws/ conduct 
 21.  A  cluster/ constellation/ galaxy  of stars. 
 22.  A c  ompany/ regiment/ army  of soldiers. 
 23.  A  congregation  in a religious place 
 24.  A  course of/ series of  lectures 
 25.  A  crew  of sailors 
 26.  A  crowd/ mob of  people 
 27.  A  curriculum  of studies 
 28.  A  ﬂight  of steps, stairs 
 29.  A  ﬂeet of  ships or motorcars 
 30.  A  ﬂock  of geese, sheep and birds 
 31.  A  gaggle  of geese 
 32.  A  grove  of trees 
 33.  A  garland/bunch/bouquet  of ﬂowers 
 34.  A  heap  of ruins, sand, stones 
 35.  A  herd  of cattle/ elephants 
 36.  A  hive  of bees 
 37.  A  hum  of bees 
 38.  A  leap  of leopards 
 


=== PAGE 7 ===
  
 39.  A  litter  of puppies/ pigs/ kittens 
 40.  An o  rchestra  of musicians 
 41.  A  pea  l of bells 
 42.  A  pack  of hounds, cards, wolves, suitcase 
 43.  A  pair  of shoes, scissors, compasses, trousers etc. 
 44.  A s  erie  s of events 
 45.  A  sheaf  of corn 
 46.  A  shoal or school  of ﬁsh 
 47.  A swarm  of ants, bees or ﬂies 
 48.  A  squad  of soldiers or police oﬃcers. 
 49.  A  train  of carriages, followers etc. 
 50.  A  troop  of horses (cavalry), scouts. 
 51.  A  troupe  of performers. 
 52.  A  tyranny  of dictators 
 53.  A  wealth  of information 
 54.  A  yoke  of oxen 
 55.  A  volley  of shots, arrows, bullets 
 RULE 19  :- 
 NOUN-NUMBER (Singular-Plural) 
 Changing Singular to Plural: 
 RULE (i)  :-  We add “s” to the end of any noun to make  it plural. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Horse                    horses                    Chair                      chairs 
 RULE (ii)  :-  Nouns ending in  s, ss, ch, sh, z or x  add ‘es’ to make it plural. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Bus  Buses  Fox  Foxes 
 Bush  Bushes  Tax  Taxes 
 Switch  Switches  Quiz  Quizzes 
 Bench  Benches  Dish  Dishes 
 Exceptions  :- 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Stomach  Stomachs  Radius  Radii 
 Locus  Loci  Ox  Oxen 
 Index  Indices 
 RULE (iii)  :-  For Nouns ending in  'o'  and preceded  by a consonant we add ‘es’ to make it plural. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Hero  Heroes  Potato  Potatoes 
 Mosquito  Mosquitoes  Mango  Mangoes 
 Cargo  Cargoes  Echo  Echoes 
 Exceptions  :- 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Dynamo  Dynamos  Piano  Pianos 
 Photo  Photos  Solo  Solos 
 RULE (iv)  :-  Nouns ending in  double vowels,  add “s”. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Tree  Trees  Bee  Bees 
 Radio  Radios  Zoo  Zoos 
 Portfolio  Portfolios 
 RULE (v)  :-  For nouns ending in “y” and preceded by  a consonant, remove “y” and add “ies”  . 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Cry  Cries  Country  Countries 
 Family  Families  Pony  Ponies 
 City  Cities  Lorry  Lorries 
 Reply  Replies 
 


=== PAGE 8 ===
  
 RULE (vi)  :-  For nouns ending in “y” and preceded by a vowel, simply add “s”. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Key  Keys  Donkey  Donkeys 
 Ray  Rays  Monkey  Monkeys 
 Way  Ways  Valley  Valleys 
 Toy  Toys 
 RULE (vii)  :-  For nouns ending in “f” or “fe”. Remove  f/fe and add “ves”. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Calf  Calves  Half  Halves 
 Wife  Wives  Thief  Thieves 
 Wolf  Wolves  Life  Lives 
 Leaf  Leaves  Knife  Knives 
 Shelf  Shelves  Loaf  Loaves 
 Exceptions  :- 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Belief  Beliefs  Chief  Chiefs 
 Cliff  Cliffs  Dwarf  Dwarfs 
 Grief  Griefs  Gulf  Gulfs 
 Proof  Proofs  Roof  Roofs 
 Safe  Safes  Scarf  Scarfs 
 Turf  Turfs  Brief  Briefs 
 RULE (viii)  :-  For changing Compound Nouns to plural,  make the main word plural. Do not add “s” to the end of the word. 
 Singular  Plural 
 Bedroom  Bedrooms 
 Commander-in-chief  Commanders-in-chief 
 Peacock  Peacocks 
 Brother-in-law  Brothers-in-law 
 Step-daughter  Step-daughters 
 Maid-servant  Maid-servants 
 Mother-in-law  Mothers-in-law 
 Sister-in-law  Sisters-in-law 
 RULE (ix)  :- 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Man  Men  Woman  Women 
 Foot  Feet  Tooth  Teeth 
 Mouse  Mice  Louse  Lice 
 Goose  Geese  Oasis  Oases 
 Child  Children  Ox  Oxen 
 RULE 20  :- 
 Some Typical Plural Nouns (Number) 
 (a)  Latin words:  For words of Latin origin and ending  in “um” change the “um” to “a”. 
 Singular  Plural 
 Datum  Data 
 Ovum  Ova 
 Agendum  Agenda 
 Dictum  Dicta 
 Memorandum  Memoranda 
 Stratum  Strata 
 Addendum  Addenda 
 Corrigendum  Corrigenda 
 For some other latin words ending in “um” we simply add “s” to make it plural. 
 Singular  Plural 
 Auditorium  Auditoriums 
 Premium  Premiums 
 Asylum  Asylums 
 Museums  Museums 
 Aquarium  Aquariums 
 


=== PAGE 9 ===
  
 Mausoleum  Mausoleums 
 Forum  Forums 
 Pendulum  Pendulums 
 (b)  For Latin words ending in “us” change the “us”  to “i” 
 Singular  Plural 
 Radius  Radii 
 Syllabus  Syllabi 
 Focus  Foci 
 Cactus  Cacti 
 (c)  For Greek words ending in “is”, to make it Plural,  “is” is changed to “es”. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Analysis  Analyses  Basis  Bases 
 Thesis  Theses  Hypothesis  Hypotheses 
 Crisis  Crises 
 (d)  For Greek words ending in “on”, the “on” is changed  to “a”. 
 Singular  Plural 
 Phenomenon  Phenomena 
 Criterion  Criteria 
 (e)  For abbreviations we simply add an “s” to the  last alphabet. 
 Singular  Plural                     Singular  Plural 
 MP  MPs  VIP  VIPs 
 (f)  For letters, digits and alphabets 
 ➢   To make the plural of a single digit or a number, we simply add ‘s’ at the end. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 5  5s  1990  1990s 
 0  0s  20  20s 
 ➢   To make the plural of small case (or lowercase) letters, we add  apostrophe + s 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 p  p’s  s  s’s 
 ➢   To  make  the  plural  of  a  capital  letter,  an  abbreviation,  an  acronym,  an  initialism,  a  symbol(#,  @,  %,  etc),  we  simply  add  s 
 without an apostrophe at the end. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 A  As  B  Bs 
 ABC  ABCs  MP3  MP3s 
 MLA  MLAs  MP  MPs 
 FAQ  FAQs  MRI  MRIs 
 #  #s  $  $s 
 (g)  There are some adjectives, if we add “s”/“es”  to these adjectives they become plural nouns. 
 Singular  Plural  Singular  Plural 
 Sweet  Sweets  Essential  Essentials 
 Valuable  Valuables  Explosive  Explosives 
 Good  Goods  Moveable  Moveables 
 RULE 21  :-  The following compound nouns are always  used in the plural form. 
 Human rights, current events, inverted commas, armed forces, natural resources, social studies, industrial relations, high heels. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  High heels cause discomfort. 
 ●  Current events of the past year are very important for the exam. 
 ●  Natural resources are not found in this part of the country. 
 RULE 22  :-  There are some nouns; if we make them plural  the meaning changes completely. 
 S.N.  Singular  Plural 
 1.  Spectacle  (a visually striking performance)  Spectacles (a pair of glasses) 
 


=== PAGE 10 ===
  
 2.  Chain  (a  sequence  of  items  of  the  same  type 
 forming a line) 
 Chains  (a  series  of  linked  metal  rings  used  for  fastening  or  securing 
 something, or for pulling loads.) 
 3.  Appearance  (The  way  that  someone  or 
 something looks) 
 Appearances (an act of performing or participating in a public event) 
 4.  Damage  (Physical  harm  that  impairs  the  value, 
 usefulness, or normal function of something.) 
 damages  (a  sum  of  money  claimed  or  awarded  in  compensation  for  a 
 loss or an injury.) 
 5.  Ground (The solid surface of the earth)  grounds (basis) 
 6.  Custom (A tradition)  Customs  (Customs  duty-  a  tax  imposed  on  imports  and  exports  of 
 goods.) 
 7.  Air (A gaseous substance)  Airs (Affected manners intended to impress) 
 8.  Return (come or go back to a place or person)  Returns (Income tax returns) 
 9.  Iron (A metal)  Irons (Fetters or chains) 
 10.  Force (Strength/ energy)  Forces (An organized body of military personnel or police.) 
 11.  Sand  (A  loose  granular  substance,  typically  pale 
 yellowish brown) 
 Sands (A small desert) 
 12.  Wood  (The  hard  ﬁbrous  material  that  forms  the 
 main substance of the trunk) 
 Woods (A small forest) 
 13.  Asset (Quality)  Assets (Property) 
 14.  Alphabet (a set of letters)  Alphabets (languages) 
 15.  Content (satisfaction)  Contents (Subject matters) 
 16.  Water  Waters (Ocean / Sea) 
 RULE 23  :- 
 Usage of Apostrophe (’s  ) 
 i)  An apostrophe is used to show  possession. 
 To show  possession  with a  singular noun  , add an apostrophe  plus the letter “s”. 
 Examples :-  a woman’s responsibility, the boss’s wife,  that man’s son, the dog’s tail. 
 ii)  Most  nouns  form  their  plurals  by  adding  either  the  letter  “s”  or  “es”  (boy,  boys;  letter,  letters;  actress,  actresses  etc.)  To  show  plural 
 possession  , simply put an apostrophe after the “s”. 
 Correct:  boys’ night out (boy + s  + apostrophe) 
 Incorrect:  boy’s night out (implies only  one boy) 
 Correct:  girls’  hostel (girl + s  + apostrophe) 
 Incorrect:  girl’s hostel 
 iii)  With a  singular compound noun  (for example, mother-in-law),  show possession with an apostrophe + s  at the end  of the word. 
 Example :- 
 ●  My  mother-in-law’s  house 
 If the  compound noun  (e.g., brother-in-law) is to  be made  plural  , form the  plural ﬁrst  (brothers-in-law),  and then use the apostrophe + s. 
 Example :- 
 ●  My two brothers-in-law’s house 
 iv)  If two people possess the same item, put the  apostrophe  + s after the second name  only. 
 Example :- 
 ●  Ravi and Geeta’s home is constructed of stone. 
 In cases of separate rather than joint possession, use the possessive form for both. 
 Example :- 
 ●  Ravi’s and Geeta’s homes are both lovely.(They don’t own the homes jointly.) 
 v)  Use an  apostrophe with contractions  . The apostrophe  is placed where a letter or letters have been removed. 
 Examples :-  doesn’t, won’t, it’s, can’t, you’ve, etc. 
 


=== PAGE 11 ===
  
 vi)  The personal pronouns  hers, ours, yours, theirs, its, whose, and oneself  never take an apostrophe. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  Feed a horse grain. It’s better for its health. 
 ●  Is this pen your’s ? (  Incorrect  ) 
 ●  Is this pen yours ? (  Correct  ) 
 vii)  Apostrophe and s (‘s) are used only for living  things  . For non-living things, we use “of”. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  The telephone’s cable is damaged.(  Incorrect) 
 ●  The cable of the telephone is damaged.(  Correct) 
 ●  The child broke the table’s leg.(  Incorrect) 
 ●  The child broke the leg of the table.(  Correct) 
 viii)  We use ‘s in case of  personiﬁcation  . 
 Example :-  The  wind's song  hummed gently through the  night, calming the world. 
 ix)  Idioms and phrases  also use ’s. 
 a)  At one’s wit’s end. 
 b)  b) At an arm’s length. 
 x)  ’s can also be used for  celestial bodies/planets  etc 
 Examples :- 
 ●  The Earth's rotation causes the cycle of day and night. 
 ●  The Moon's surface is covered in craters and dust. 
 xi)  Double apostrophe  is not to be used. 
 Examples :- 
 ●  My mother’s friend’s daughter has topped the exam. (Incorrect) 
 ●  The daughter of my mother’s friend has topped the exam. (Correct) 
 xii)  We can use ’s with  Anybody/ Nobody/ Everybody/  Somebody/ Anyone/ Someone/ No one/ Everyone . 
 Examples :- 
 ●  Everyone’s responsibility is no one’s responsibility. 
 If “else” has been used after these words, then ’s will be used after “else”. 
 ●  I can do only your work, not somebody else’s. 
 It is incorrect to write  “somebody’s else”, “everybody’s  else”  . 
 Practice Exercise 
 Directions :-  In these questions, read each sentence  to ﬁnd out whether there is  any error in it. The error, if any, will be in one part of 
 the  sentence. The number of that part is the answer, if there is no error the answer is (d). (Ignore errors of punctuation, if any.) 
 